now before continuing to learn
javascript in this new section we should
first activate a special mode in
javascript called strict mode
and here on my desktop i already have
the folder for this part 2 fundamentals
section and for you as i explained
before these starter files will come
from the github repository that i showed
you at the beginning of the course
so use that github repository as your
starter folder or of course you can just
copy that data somewhere else to your
computer and work from there whatever
works for you
now i'm creating here
a new vs code window
and let's open this
new folder
so that's our new working folder
and this time we already have the script
file here
and in the
html file we see that the script is also
already linked so we don't have to do
that this time
at this point i assume that you already
know how to do that
so closing the sidebar here and let's
now get started in this new section and
as i said let's start with strict mode
so strict mode is a special mode that we
can activate in javascript which makes
it easier for us to write a secure
javascript code
and all we have to do to activate strict
mode is to write this string at the
beginning of the script so use
strict
and that's it so with this we activated
strict mode for the entire script
now what's important is that this line
of code so this statement here basically
has to be the very first statement in
the script so if we have any code before
this dense strict mode will not be
activated
comments are allowed because javascript
will just ignore them but no code
okay
now we actually can also activate strict
mode only for a specific function or a
specific block but i don't really see
the point in doing that and so i always
just use it at the beginning of each
script
and so i believe that you should do the
same so always just put strict mode in
the beginning of your scripts and like
that write more secure code
and with secure i mean that strict mode
makes it easier for us developers to
avoid accidental errors so basically it
avoids us to introduce bugs into our
code
and that's because of two reasons first
strict mode forbids us to do certain
things and second it will actually
create visible errors for us in certain
situations in which without strict mode
javascript would simply fail silently
without letting us know that we did a
mistake
okay
so again first strict mode forbids us to
do certain things and second it creates
visible errors in the developer console
where in other situations javascript
would just fail silently
okay but now to make this a bit more
clear let's actually see an example of
one of the most important changes that
strict mode introduces
so let's create a variable here with a
complicated name
let's say has
drivers
license
and let's initialize it to false here
and then i also will create
pass test
and set that to true and i'm using let
in both of them because i want to change
them later and actually this one not
so let's just use a const here because
remember by default we should always use
const to avoid accidental errors
so basically there is a certain person
which right now does not have a driver's
license but they just passed a test
that's why we have pass test
set to true
and now we want to write some logic so
that when they pass the test
this variable here gets set to true
so we can say if
pass
test
right because this here is a boolean
value and so this condition will be
either true or false
and then let's introduce a simple bug
here okay
so this is a kind of hard to write
variable name and so let's pretend that
we are writing it wrong here
so has
driver
license
equal
to true
so what i did here was to basically omit
the s
so this letter here is not in this
variable that i'm trying to change here
to true
and again that is an error that i'm
making here on purpose just to show you
how strict mode can help us avoid a
certain kind of error because doing this
is actually more common than you might
think
okay
and now then let's lock something to the
console if the person has a driver's
license
and so now we're actually going to go
back to writing it correctly
so if
has driver's license
and so you see that now this one is
exactly the same
as vs code highlights both
so
if has driver's license
then log
to the console
i can
drive
and now let's actually start by
deactivating strict mode again just so
we see how this bug could affect our
code
so i'm giving it a save
and then let's go
and open this
index.html file
okay
now let's
open up the console here and again i'm
going to increase the text by hitting
command plus
a couple of times here
okay
so let's reload here just to make sure
that everything is working
and now what we see is that it didn't
lock icon drive to the console even
though we attempted to set has driver's
license to true here and so we expected
that driver's license being true should
then lock i can drive
but it didn't work and that's because of
the mistake that i just introduced here
on purpose
for getting this s
so without the error it should work
right but without it it's not going to
work
and again because basically here i set a
new variable to true and not the
original one so this one is still false
and that's why here this logging does
not happen
so now our program has a bug which means
that it has a mistake and we would now
go ahead and find that bug
but strict mode can actually help us
with this so let's turn it back on
give it a save and now try it again
and now we actually get an error
so here we see that has driver license
is not defined so in line number six
which is right here and so this error
message now tells us exactly what is
wrong so it tells us that this variable
is not defined and then we can see oh we
did a mistake here we're missing the s
right so now it's the same variable here
here and here okay
and so if we try that now again
then the error is gone
and so strict mode really helped us
avoiding this kind of bug that we
created here and you can experiment a
little bit with this to make it really
clear
now another thing that strict mode does
is to introduce a short list of variable
names that are reserved for features
that might be added to the language a
bit later
for example let's try to define a
variable called interface
for example for an audio interface and
now if we try this
then we see that we get an unexpected
strict mode reserved word error message
basically and that is again because
javascript is reserving this word here
for a feature that it might implement in
the future
and so by reserving this kind of words
it will then make it easier to implement
the the feature in the future
so another one is
private for example
so const
private
just some number here and so this one
will also not work
and that's because in the future
there might be something called
private fields in classes or in some
other places even in the language and
they might want to use this word for
that
and so strict mode reserves these words
so that we cannot use them for variables
it's the same logic as
this one
so we cannot call a variable if
right and that's because there is
already an if statement
so here we get unexpected token if
so that's like the rules that i
explained you in the beginning about
naming variables
okay
all right now there are actually a lot
of other changes that affect things that
we haven't learned about yet
so that's stuff like functions objects
setting properties on primitive values
and many more and i will mention them in
future lectures when the time comes but
everything that i'm going to say in the
rest of the course from now on will
always assume that you have strict mode
turned on
and so i will add this line of code here
to all the scripts in the future and so
you should do the same
anyway with this out of the way let's
now start learning functions